

# Cluster Configuration[¶](http://maas.ubuntu.com/docs/cluster-
configuration.html#cluster-configuration)

Before any of MAAS’s features can be used for the first time, you must have a
cluster controller and configure it to manage at least one network of nodes.
Each node in the cluster should be attached to one of these networks. (In
addition, a node can be attached to any number of networks that are not
managed by MAAS.)

Managing a network normally means that MAAS will serve DHCP from the cluster
controller. **Do this only on a network that was set up with this in mind.**
Running your own DHCP server that competes with an existing one that’s already
managing the network can cause serious disruption, and it can be hard for
administrators to track the source of the problem. Worse, the problems may not
become immediately noticeable. Make sure you understand the implications of
running a DHCP server before doing this. If MAAS detects any DHCP servers
already running on these nteworks, it will show them on the cluster’s
configuration page.

## Network requirements[¶](http://maas.ubuntu.com/docs/cluster-
configuration.html#network-requirements)

The cluster controller manages a network of nodes through one of its
interfaces as defined in MAAS. Cluster interfaces are discovered
automatically, though this may not happen e.g. if the network interface was
down when MAAS was installed.

When a cluster controller manages nodes on a network through one of its
interfaces, the nodes must be on the same subnet as the cluster interface.
This is for two reasons:

  1. If the cluster controller is configured to manage DHCP, the nodes must be able to configure their own network interfaces using MAAS’s DHCP server. This means that either they must be on the same subnet, or that DHCP packets are being specially routed between the nodes’ subnet and MAAS’s DHCP server.
  2. The cluster controller must be able to find nodes’ IP addresses based on their MAC addresses, by inspecting its ARP cache. This implies that the nodes and the clsuter controler must on the same physical subnet.

## Cluster acceptance[¶](http://maas.ubuntu.com/docs/cluster-
configuration.html#cluster-acceptance)

If you install your first cluster controller on the same system as the region
controller, as is the case when you install the full “maas” ubuntu package, it
will be automatically accepted by default (but not yet configured, see below).
Any other cluster controllers you set up will show up in the user interface as
“pending,” until you manually accept them into the MAAS.

To accept a cluster controller, click on the settings “cog” icon at the top
right to visit the settings page:

![_images/cluster-accept.png](./Cluster Configuration — MAAS 1.5
documentation4_files/cluster-accept.png)

You can either click on “Accept all” or click on the edit icon to edit the
cluster. After clicking on the edit icon, you will see this page:

![_images/cluster-edit.png](./Cluster Configuration — MAAS 1.5
documentation4_files/cluster-edit.png)

Here you can change the cluster’s name as it appears in the UI, its DNS zone,
and its status. Accepting the cluster changes its status from “pending” to
“accepted.”

Now that the cluster controller is accepted, you can configure one or more of
its network interfaces to be managed by MAAS. This will enable the cluster
controller to manage nodes attached to those networks. The next section
explains how to do this and what choices are to be made.

## Cluster interface management[¶](http://maas.ubuntu.com/docs/cluster-
configuration.html#cluster-interface-management)

MAAS automatically recognises the network interfaces on each cluster
controller. Some (though not necessarily all) of these will be connected to
networks where you want to manage nodes. We recommend letting your cluster
controller act as a DHCP server for these networks, by configuring those
interfaces in the MAAS user interface.

As an example, we will configure the cluster controller to manage a network on
interface `eth0`. Click on the edit icon for `eth0`, which takes us to this
page:

![_images/cluster-interface-edit.png](./Cluster Configuration — MAAS 1.5
documentation4_files/cluster-interface-edit.png)

Here you can select to what extent you want the cluster controller to manage
the network:

  1. DHCP only - this will run a DHCP server on your cluster
  2. DHCP and DNS - this will run a DHCP server on the cluster _and_ configure the DNS server included with the region controller so that it can be used to look up hosts on this network by name.

Note

You cannot have DNS management without DHCP management because MAAS relies on
its own DHCP server’s leases file to work out the IP address of nodes in the
cluster.

If you set the interface to be managed, you now need to provide all of the
usual DHCP details in the input fields below. Once done, click “Save
interface”. The cluster controller will now be able to boot nodes on this
network.

There is also an option to leave the network unmanaged. Use this for networks
where you don’t want to manage any nodes. Or, if you do want to manage nodes
but don’t want the cluster controller to serve DHCP, you may be able to get by
without it. This is explained in [_Manual DHCP
configuration_](http://maas.ubuntu.com/docs/configure.html#manual-dhcp).

## Multiple networks[¶](http://maas.ubuntu.com/docs/cluster-configuration.html
#multiple-networks)

A single cluster controller can manage more than one network, each from a
different network interface on the cluster-controller server. This may help
you scale your cluster to larger numbers of nodes, or it may be a requirement
of your network architecture.

